feat: patch repository with React render engine (#6)
asyncapi/template-for-generator-templates: README.md

- `--debug` enables the debug mode in Nunjucks engine what makes filters debugging simpler, 
- `--watch-template` enables a watcher of changes that you make in the Template. It regenerates your Template whenever it detects a change,
- `--install` enforces reinstallation of the Template

There are two ways you can work on template development:

- Use global Generator and Template from your local sources:

  ```bash
  # assumption is that you run this command from the root of your Template
  ag https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asyncapi/generator/v1.0.1/test/docs/dummy.yml ./ -o output
  ```

- Use Generator from sources and Template also from local sources. This approach enables more debugging options with awesome `console.log` in the Generator sources or even the Parser located in `node_modules` of the Generator:
  
  ```bash
  # assumption is that you run this command from the root of your Template
  # assumption is that generator sources are cloned on the same level as the Template
  ../generator/cli.js https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asyncapi/generator/v1.0.1/test/docs/dummy.yml ./ -o output
  ```

# Template render engine

> The [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator) supports feature called templating engine. You can write template using tool which you prefer more. The template engine at the moment can be either [React](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator-react-sdk) (recommended) or [Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) (default). This can be controlled with the `renderer` property in the [template configuration](#renderer).

Reviewer: What about this?

```suggestion
The [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator) allows you to write templates using [React](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator-react-sdk) (recommended) or [Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) (default). This can be controlled with the `renderer` property in the [template configuration](#renderer).
```

# Learning Resources

> Alwasy during template development consult for this documentation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While developing a new template, make sure you check out the following documentation:
```

- [Generator documentation](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/blob/master/docs/authoring.md)
- [AsyncAPI JavaScript Parser API reference](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/blob/master/API.md)

> Additional resources for the React:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using React for your template:
```

- [React SDK documentation](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator-react-sdk)
- [React documentation](https://en.reactjs.org/docs/getting-started.html)

> Additional resources for the Nunjucks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using Nunjucks for your template:
```

```js
// Import custom components from file 
import { HTML, Head, Body } from "../partials/common";

/* 
 * Below you can see how reusable chunks (components) could be called.
 * Just write a new component (or import it) and place it inside the File or another component.
 * 
 * Notice that you can pass parameters to components. In fact, underneath, each component is a pure Javascript function.
 */
export default function({ asyncapi, params }) {
  ...
  const cssLinks = [
    'https://unpkg.com/tailwindcss@^1.0/dist/tailwind.min.css',
    'style.css',
  ];

  // Notice that root component is the `File` component.
  return (
    <File name="index.html">
      <HTML>
        <Head cssLinks={cssLinks} />
        <Body>
          <BodyContent asyncapi={asyncapi} />
          ...
        </Body>
      </HTML>
    </File>
  );
}

// Custom component inside template file
function BodyContent({ asyncapi }) {
  // implemntation...
}
```

Each custom component must returns as output pure `string`, another custom component, `null` or `undefined`. Nothing will be rendered for the last two.

> Recommended place to create reusable chunks is the `partials` folder. The reusable parts can be located both in the `template` folder as in another named folder. The only exception is the `hooks` folder, it is reserved for the Generator.

Reviewer 2: really `partials`? it is related to nunjucks, we should promote that components go to `template/components` and other functions to `template/helpers` and therefore all template related goes to `template`

Author: I thought about the components folder, but this name is too much associated with UI and not templates, but helpers is a good idea. Of course, these are just developer recommendations and as it says, people can create components in the templates folder as well. React is not restrictive as Nunjucks.

Reviewer 2: awesome, so please move them to templates folder under some subdirectory, I'm ok with components but if you have strong feelings against then choose something else.

the only problem I see is that in markdown template you have all in partials, so we will have it a bit inconsistent, we should choose one recommendation here that will be used everywhere, at least in asyncapi org

Reviewer 2: regarding the agreement, I [see](https://github.com/asyncapi/template-for-generator-templates/pull/6#discussion_r539943292) that for example, that @fmvilas  prefers to have stuff not in `partials` but outside `template`. We should agree on one

cc @jonaslagoni

Author: As you want, we can rename to `components` and create fast PR with renaming also in `markdown-template`.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, I agree we should promote a standard folder to place partials in (so people can easily get started without having to take an active choice). For me I dont really like having the `template` folder used for partials since it should reassembly the actual generated files as close as possible and partials would clutter this.

But I have no strong opinion whether we suggest a `helpers`, `partials` or `darth wader` folder for storing them in the root folder of the template 😄

Reviewer: IMHO, I think it should be `components` and it should be outside the `template` folder. The reason is what @jonaslagoni said, to make it clear what files are meant to be part of the output and what aren't.

That said, what was the reason to have a `template` folder? IIRC, it was to differentiate the `package.json` of the template from a potentially generated `package.json`. Same for `README.md`, `package-lock.json`, etc. Thinking about that, I think our structure should be:

```
template
  ... // potential output files
components
  ... // reusable parts (same as partial, conceptually)
package.json
README.md
etc.
```

If you look at that, it's the same structure Next.js uses, they just call it `pages` instead of `template`:

```
pages
  ... // available pages
components
  ... // reusable parts
package.json
README.md
etc.
```

Therefore, it's not a strange pattern. I'm also happy with `files` instead of `template` if that makes more sense.

### Using JS in template

> When you use React, you are actually using JS, so you can apply conditions to rendering, split functionality into separate/reusable functions, create compisition, extend/mix functions etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you use React, you are actually using JS, so you can apply conditions to rendering, split functionality into separate/reusable functions, create a composition, extend/mix functions etc.
```

```js
/* 
 * If asyncapi has `externalDocs` property then the Generator will return appropriate string,
 * otherwise it won't render anything.
 */
function ExternalDocs({ asyncapi }) {
  if (!asyncapi.hasExternalDocs()) return null;
  return `Don't forget to visit our website ${asyncapi.externalDocs().url()}.`
}
```

### Retrieve rendered content from children

Each component has a `childrenContent` property. It is the processed children content of a component into a pure string. You can use it for compositions in your component.

```js
function CustomComponent({ childrenContent }) {
  return `some text at the beginning: ${childrenContent}`
}

function RootComponent() {
  return (
    <CustomComponent>
      some text at the end.
    </CustomComponent>
  );
}
```

Then output from `RootComponent` will be `some text at the beginning: some text at the end.`.

> ### Render component to string

Reviewer 2: this section and 3more before should be `####` so they end up under `Template` section in toc

### React

The list of resources that are relevant for this Template using React:

- `template` is a directory where you keep all the files that will be processed by the Generator using React. Only files with the `.js`, `.jsx` and `.cjs` extensions are taken and processed by the Generator. The rest are skipped.
- `partials` is a directory where you keep reusable parts (called also components) of the templates. You can also put there helper functions to handle perform actions on AsyncAPI data inside components.

> **NOTE**: `partials` directory is recommended place to split reusable chunks/helpers. The reusable parts can be located both in the `template` folder as in another named folder. The only exception is the `hooks` folder, it is reserved for the Generator.

> **NOTE**: If you are using React as a rendering engine, you should delete the given folders which are related to Nunjucks: `filters`, `template_njk`, `partials_njk`.

#### Template

Checkout [`template`](template) directory to see how different features of the generator are presented.

##### File component

> Each template, like in the [`template/index.js`](template/index.js) file should return in default export function as root the `<File>` component (or array of `<File>` components), which contains the necessary metadata for the Generator to render the file:

Author: Thanks, but:
- you cannot use class component because we don't check if default export is class or normal function.
- you can return `null`, `undefined` etc to not render template. See here https://github.com/asyncapi/generator-react-sdk/blob/d10601783a732be9299e5cabbaccf7fa0000da04/src/renderer/template.ts#L20 `undefined` is handled in generator side, not renderer.

For the generator to render a file with React certain conditions are required. 
1. The file should export a default function (example see the [`template/index.js`](template/index.js) file).
2. That function should return a `<File>` component as root component which contains the necessary metadata for the Generator to render the file. Returning `null`, `undefined` or another negative value forces the Generator to not create the file.

Will be good?

> Each template, like in the [`template/index.js`](template/index.js) file should return in default export function as root the `<File>` component (or array of `<File>` components), which contains the necessary metadata for the Generator to render the file:

Reviewer 3: Ahh, thought the component was possible because of the transpiler 😄 Yea sounds good 👍

```js
/*
 * Each template to be rendered must have as a root component a File component or an array of File components,
 * otherwise it will be skipped.
 * 
 * If you don't want to render anything, you can return `null` and the Generator will skip the given template.
 */
export default function({ asyncapi, params }) {
  if (!asyncapi.hasComponents()) {
    return null;
  }

  // Notice that root component is the `File` component.
  return (
    <File name="index.html">
      <HTML>
        ...
      </HTML>
    </File>
  )
}
```

##### Template Context

Generator passes to render engine extra context that you can access in templates:

- `originalAsyncAPI` is a String of original AsyncAPI document that the user passed to the Generator.
- `asyncapi` is a parsed AsyncAPI document with all additional functions and properties. You should use it to access document contents.

> - `params` is an Object with all the parameters passed to the Generator by the user.

Author: Check parts with `Nunjucks`. There isn't mentioned also about File templates.

> - `params` is an Object with all the parameters passed to the Generator by the user.

Reviewer 3: But do you think that developers will make that connection that additional context variables are available under certain conditions when its not documented under react? 🤔

> - `params` is an Object with all the parameters passed to the Generator by the user.

Author: But it's documented in `authoring.md` file, so propably I will extract this section before sections about React and Nunjucks and also add link to authoring.md with short info about this feature.

> - `params` is an Object with all the parameters passed to the Generator by the user.

Author: Done

#### Using JS in template

When you use React, you are actually using JS, so you can apply conditions to rendering, split functionality into separate/reusable functions, create compisition, extend/mix functions etc.

```js
/* 
 * If asyncapi has `externalDocs` property then the Generator will return appropriate string,
 * otherwise won't render anything.
 */
function ExternalDocs({ asyncapi }) {
  if (!asyncapi.hasExternalDocs()) return null;
  return `Don't forget to visit our website ${asyncapi.externalDocs().url()}.`
}
```

#### Retrieve rendered content from children

Each component has a `childrenContent` property. It is the processed children content of a component into a pure string. You can use it for compositions in your component.

```js
function CustomComponent({ childrenContent }) {
  return `some text at the beginning: ${childrenContent}`
}

function RootComponent() {
  return (
    <CustomComponent>
      some text at the end.
    </CustomComponent>
  );
}
```

Then output from `RootComponent` will be `some text at the beginning: some text at the end.`.

#### Render component to string

> If you need process the React component to string you should use `render` function from `@asyncapi/generator-react-sdk` package. This function transforms given component (and its children) and returns pure string. You can check [template/index.js](template/index.js) to see how it could by done:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need to process the React component to string you should use `render` function from `@asyncapi/generator-react-sdk` package. This function transforms a given component (and its children) and returns the pure string representation. You can check the [template/index.js](template/index.js) to see how it could by done:
```

```js
import { render } from "@asyncapi/generator-react-sdk";

function BodyContent({ asyncapi }) {
  ...
  return `
<div class="container mx-auto px-4">        
  <p> 
    <h1>${apiName}</h1>
    ${render(<ListChannels channels={channels} operationType='subscribe' />)}
    ${render(<ListChannels channels={channels} operationType='publish' />)}
    ${render(<DiagramContent asyncapi={asyncapi} />)}
    ${render(<Extension asyncapi={asyncapi} />)}
    ${render(<ExternalDocs asyncapi={asyncapi} />)}
  </p> 
</div>  
`;
}
```

#### Render set of files

> Using the React render engine you can return from template an array of File components. It's very helpful when you want to render several files with a given structure but with different input data. Check out [template/schemas/$schema-example.js](template/schemas/$schema-example.js) file to see an example how you render an array of files:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using the React render engine you can from the template file return an array of File components. It's very helpful when you want to render several files with a given structure but with different input data. Check out [template/schemas/$schema-example.js](template/schemas/$schema-example.js) file to see an example on how you render an array of files:
```

## Sample Template That Presents Generator Features And Best Practices In Using Them

> Generator depends on [React](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator-react-sdk) or [Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) templating engine. You can choose the one you prefer. Each render engine has a different way of working and a different set of features. Keep that in mind when familiarizing with the Generator functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generator depends on [React](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator-react-sdk) (if you're using React) or [Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) (if you're using Nunjucks) templating engine. You can choose the one you prefer. Each rendering engine has a different way of working and a different set of features. Keep that in mind when familiarizing yourself with the Generator functionality.
```

> Templates are highly configurable. This Template also showcases most of the configuration options used in action. Configurations are stored in the `package.json` file in the [`generator`](#configuration) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Templates are highly configurable. This template also showcases most of the configuration options used in action. Configurations are stored in the `package.json` file in the [`generator`](#configuration) section.
```

> Both React and Nunjucks template has `hooks` directory. It's a place where you keep hooks that are special JavaScript functions. The [Hooks](#hooks) is a native Generator feature, not related to React or Nunjucks. It allows you to plug into different stages of the generation process with some custom logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both React and Nunjucks templates can have a `hooks` directory containing **hooks**,  which are special JavaScript functions. This is a native Generator feature and it's not related to React or Nunjucks. It allows you to plug into different stages of the generation process with some custom logic.
```

> This Template contains an example implementation of all features includes in the Generator, both in React and in Nunjucks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This template contains an example implementation of all the features included in Generator, both in React and in Nunjucks.
```

### React

> The list of resources that are relevant for this Template using React:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of resources that are relevant for this template using React:
```

- `template` is a directory where you keep all the files that will be processed by the Generator using React. Only files with the `.js`, `.jsx` and `.cjs` extensions are taken and processed by the Generator. The rest are skipped.

> - `partials` is a directory where you keep reusable parts (called also components) of the templates. You can also put there helper functions to handle perform actions on AsyncAPI data inside components.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we just ignore `partials` when using React? I mean, people can call their directories the way they want and place them wherever they prefer (outside the `template` directory, of course).

Reviewer 3: I agree, when using React partials should not be a "thing" 😄

Author: I removed part with `partials` but left `**NOTE**` with info where dev can create components :)

> > **NOTE**: `partials` directory is recommended place to split reusable chunks/helpers. The reusable parts can be located both in the `template` folder as in another named folder. The only exception is the `hooks` folder, it is reserved for the Generator.

Reviewer: Is that actually true? If I put a component inside `template`, it would also be generated as a separate file, right?

Reviewer 3: Only if certain criteria are fulfilled i.e. those stated in https://github.com/asyncapi/template-for-generator-templates/blob/c0c984e385ca2dd78fba27cf4fc511a4f42ae747/README.md#file-component. Otherwise it discard the rendering of the file (unless if you specify it as non-rendering ofcourse). This means that in practise you can actually place reuseable components inside the `template` directory 😄

  return `some text at the beginning: ${childrenContent}`
}

function RootComponent() {
  return (
    <CustomComponent>
      some text at the end.
    </CustomComponent>
  );
}
```

Then output from `RootComponent` will be `some text at the beginning: some text at the end.`.

#### Render component to string

If you need to process the React component to string you should use `render` function from `@asyncapi/generator-react-sdk` package. This function transforms a given component (and its children) and returns the pure string representation. You can check the [template/index.js](template/index.js) to see how it could by done:

```js
import { render } from "@asyncapi/generator-react-sdk";

function BodyContent({ asyncapi }) {
  ...
  return `
<div class="container mx-auto px-4">        
  <p> 
    <h1>${apiName}</h1>
    ${render(<ListChannels channels={channels} operationType='subscribe' />)}
    ${render(<ListChannels channels={channels} operationType='publish' />)}
    ${render(<DiagramContent asyncapi={asyncapi} />)}
    ${render(<Extension asyncapi={asyncapi} />)}
    ${render(<ExternalDocs asyncapi={asyncapi} />)}
  </p> 
</div>  
`;
}
```

#### File Templates

> The Generator has a feature called [`file templates`](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/blob/master/docs/authoring.md#file-templates) that allows you to create a template file with special that has `$$` markers, like `$$schema$$`. There are multiple different file templates available. In this Template, during generation, `$$schema$$` is replaced with a schema name, and Template gets the following variables in the context:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Generator has a feature called [`file templates`](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/blob/master/docs/authoring.md#file-templates) that allows you to create a template file with a special syntax that has `$$` markers, like `$$schema$$`. There are multiple different file templates available. In this template, during generation, `$$schema$$` is replaced with a schema name, and the template gets the following variables in the context:
```

  return (
    <File name={`${name}-example.html`}>
      <SchemaFile schemaName={schemaName} schema={schema} />
    </File>
  );
}

function SchemaFile({ schemaName, schema }) {
  // implementation...
}
```

This one template file results in multiple HTML files, one per schema.

### Nunjucks

The list of resources that are relevant for this Template using Nunjucks:

- `template_njk` is a directory where you keep all the files that will be processed by the Generator using Nunjucks. 
- `partials_njk` is a directory where you keep [reusable parts](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/templating.html#include) of the templates. You can also put there [Nunjucks macros](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/templating.html#macro) that are like includes but customizable as you can pass custom arguments to them like to functions.
- `filters` is a directory where you keep filters later used in files from the `template_njk` directory. Filters are normal JavaScript functions that you can apply to Nunjucks variables in the template files. It is [native Nunjucks functionality](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/templating.html#filters), and we are just making it easier to provide them.

> 

Reviewer 3: I feel like this is way too much work for newcomers that just want to get started... I know this is a bit late to recognize with all the work you put into it @magicmatatjahu. But maybe we should concider creating a separate template for template repos, one for nunjucks, one for react? 🤔

Author: We have discussion for this. My first approach was create separate template, but we must decide in which way we want to go https://asyncapi.slack.com/archives/CQVJXFNQL/p1606474225282900

> > **NOTE**: If you are using Nunjucks as a rendering engine, you should delete the given folders which are related to React: `template`, `partials`. You should also change names of folders: `template_njk` -> `template` and `partials_njk` -> `partials`, remove the `renderer` field from [`generator`](#configuration) section and remove `react`, `@asyncapi/generator-react-sdk` and `source-map-support` dependencies in the `package.json` file under `dependencies` field.

Reviewer 3: `source-map-support` and `react` are no longer required as dependencies for a react template
```suggestion
> **NOTE**: If you are using Nunjucks as a rendering engine, you should delete the given folders which are related to React: `template`, `partials`. You should also change names of folders: `template_njk` -> `template` and `partials_njk` -> `partials`, remove the `renderer` field from [`generator`](#configuration) section and remove `@asyncapi/generator-react-sdk` dependency in the `package.json` file under `dependencies` field.
```
